---
name: Speed Limit Fine Calculator
week: 1
number: 1
points: 3
---

Authors:

  * [Ron K. Cytron](http://www.cs.wustl.edu/~cytron/)
  * Michael Waldman
  * Alan Waldman
  * Cameron Wong

You will calculate the fine one would have to pay for going over the speed limit in the state of Massachusetts
according to the [Massachusetts DMV](http://www.dmv.org/ma-massachusetts/traffic-tickets.php).

> By completing this work, you  demonstrate that you can:
>
>  * Create a Java class on your own
>  * Arrange for the class to take inputs of interest
>  * Compute output values of interest
>  * Produce meaningful output based on your computations

Have you ever received a ticket for speeding? 
If so, how do you feel about it? Were you going more or less than 10 miles over the speed limit? 
The objective of this extension is not only to allow you to practice **assignment statements** and **data types** but also for you to create a
practical tool, though of course we hope you never need to compute a speeding
fine for yourself.

Consider the following story: 

* Pat is driving a Mini Cooper at 85 MPH on a 
road that has the speed limit of 60 MPH.
* Pat is therefore going 25 MPH over the speed limit.
* If Pat is caught speeding, what would be Pat\'s fine?  

	For this assignment, we model the fine after Massachusetts law:

	* A fine is assessed only if the driver\'s speed is at least 10 MPH over
	the speed limit.
	* For the first 10 MPH over the speed limit, the fine is $50 no matter what
	* For any additional MPH past the first ten, $10 are added to the fine
	* Thus, Pat owes $50 for going at least 10 MPH over the speed limit
	(60+10=70 MPH).  To this, we add
	$10 \* 15 = $150 for the additional 15 MPH.  Thus, Pat owes $200.
 
## Procedure
* First, create a **SpeedLimit** Java class in the
**speeding** package of the **extensions** source folder.

	Do this by 

	* right (control) clicking on the **speeding** package, and then 
	* chooose **New** -> **Class**
	* Type in the name of the class (**SpeedLimit**)
	* **Be sure** to check the box so that **public static void main** is included
	* Click OK
	* Write code to prompt the user for the information you need to
	compute the fine, assuming the fine is computed as described above.

	> * Consider and decide upon the **data type** to represent information
	>of interest to this problem.
	>* You must ask the user for some input values. If you do not
	>recall how to use **ArgsProcessor**, review the video entitled *Prompting the user for input values*.
* Arrange for your program to produce output such that:
	* For the first 10 miles over the speed limit, the fine is 50 no matter what
	* For any additional mile past the first ten, 10 dollars are added to the fine

	> Beware: Make sure your program works for 0 MPH and all possible
	> positive velocities.
* Finally, your program should print how many miles you were going over the speed limit and how much money the fine will be.

Sample output based on the example story above:

```
You reported a speed of 85 MPH for a speed limit of 60 MPH.
You went 25 MPH over the speed limit.
Your fine is $200.
```

>You must compute the required information **without** using **if** statements.  To evaluate an expression conditionaly, use the
> [ternary](http://alvinalexander.com/java/edu/pj/pj010018) operator,
> an example of which follows:
> 
> `int x = (y > 7) ? 12 : 5;`
>
>The variable **x** is set to **12** if **y**\'s value
>is greater than **7**;  otherwise **x** is set to **5**.