---
name: Expected Value
week: 1
number: 4
points: 3
---

Authors:

* Alan Waldman

##Background
How do you feel about money, risk, and job satisfaction?
In this extension you will
examine some simple yet powerful ideas from economics, and you will
write code to compute how a person should behave based how he or she
views risk, reward, and job satisfaction.

The concepts we explore are as follows:

**Utility**
 
<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Utility"> Utility</a> 
is an economic term referring to the total satisfaction you
derive or receive from some action or activity.

Given the choice of two activities and absent any other
concerns, a rational person would chose the activity
that yielded the higher utility.

**Expected Value**

If there is uncertainty about outcomes, then the expected
value of a given outcome is the product of its probability of occurring and
the value of achieving that outcome.

Let\'s consider the following two examples:

1. You are given \$1.  The probability of this event is 1, and your
	value for achieving the outcome is \$1, so your expected value is \$1.

2. You enter into a (no-cost) lottery with 9,999 other people for a chance to win
	\$10,000.  If the probability of the winner is uniformly distributed among those
	who enter the lottery, you win \$10,000 with probabilty 0.0001 and you lose (win \$0)
	with probability 0.9999.  The expected value computation for this
	scenario is as follows:

	(.0001 \* \$10,000) + (.9999 \* \$0)

	Your expected value here is therefore also \$1.


* Based only on expected value, a person confronted with a choice on the
	above two scenarios would have no reason to pick one over the other, since
	the expected value is the same.  

* Now suppose the money given to you for certain in the first scenario is doubled to \$2.  A rational person would surely pick \$2 over the lottery entry, because \$2 is twice the expected value of the lottery outcome.

However, we know there are people who would choose entering the lottery over
receiving a sure \$1 or \$2.  


In the <a href="http://usnews.nbcnews.com/_news/2012/11/28/15510840-11-things-more-likely-to-happen-than-winning-the-powerball-jackpot?lite">Powerball Lottery</a>,  
your chances of winning are
1 in 175,223,510.  So a rational person shouldn\'t buy a ticket if the jackpot
is under \$175M.
But allegedly rational people do buy tickets for jackpots under that
threshold.

How can we account for this behavior?  
Read on.

**Expected Utility Theory**

The above analysis assumes a linear value for wealth.   
We can account
for those who favor or avoid risk using
<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Expected_utility_hypothesis" >Expected Utility Theory</a>.
This theory admits that rational people may have nonlinear views of
wealth.  This means that you may like \$1,000 more (or less) than 1,000 times as much
as you like \$1.
Let\'s look at three examples:

| Expected utility function | Notes |
|---------------------------|-------|
| **u(d) = d** | Linear value of wealth.  The above analysis applies to such a person. |
| **u(d) = d<sup>2</sup>** | This person values $10,000 the same way a linear person would value $100,000,000. <p> In the scenario given above, this explains why a person would enter the lottery.  The person's perceived value of winning $10,000 is $10,000<sup>2</sup>=$100,000,000, which at probability 0.0001 yields an expected utility of $10,000:  far greater than the $1 given for certain.  <p> An alternate view is that this person has a linear view of wealth  (<B>u(d)=d</B>) but an unrealistic view of the probability of winning.  For example, if this person holds the false belief that the probability of winning is 0.1 instead of .0001, then the expected value jumps from $1 to $1,000 using a linear function for expected utility. Because economists try to model human behavior assuming rationality, they translate this inflated view of luck into a nonlinear view of wealth. <p> Thus, the function <B>u(d)=d<sup>2</sup></B> captures a form of <I>risk-loving</I> behavior.   More generally, when viewed from below, any <i>convex</i> function, of which u(d)=d<sup>2</sup> is an example, models risk-loving behavior. <p> Such a person is either more certain of winning than probabilities would indicate, or alternatively has a convex expected utility function. | 
| **u(d) = sqrt(d)** | On the other hand, this <I>concave</I> function captures <I>risk-averse</I> behavior.  In the lottery scenario, a win of $10,000 would feel like a win of only $100 to this person.  With a .0001 probability of winning, the expected utility under this function is only 1 cent.  Such a person would not enter the lottery even if the no-risk payoff were reduced from $1 to 2 cents. |

##Problem
Suppose you are trying to decide between one of the following
two careers:

**Gamer**

You join a start-up company, which is exciting and
could have high pay-off, but this venture might
fail.
Let\'s say
you succeed with probability <I>p</I>, and if so you will 
earn \$190,000.  But if you fail (with probability <I>1-p</I>), you earn only \$5000.

**Programmer**

This job has no risk, and offers a salary in the range
of \$110,000 to \$160,000.  Your salary will be determined by a random
choice of a value drawn uniformly from that range.


##Procedure

Do this work by createing a class in the <KBD>expectedvalue</KBD>
package of the <KBD>extensions</KBD> folder.

Let\'s begin by assuming you have linear value for money.  Based on
the above description, write a program that does the following:

1. Prompts the user for a value for <I>p</I>, which is the probability of
	the game start-up venture succeeding.  The text of your prompt should
	be a meaningful message.

	Think about the type of <i>p</i>.  Also what is a good variable name
	for this concept?

2. Given <i>p</i>, compute the expected value of the gamer-job outcome.

	Use the equation for the Expected Value that is shown in the background section. Again, think about the type you need to represent the computed value,
	and think of a good name for this concept.

3. Now pick a salary for the programming job by choosing a random value
	between $110,000 and $160,000.

4. Print both outcomes and a message that indicates whether you should
	accept the gamer job over the programmer job depending on which one will give you the most money, according to your calculation.
	Such output might resemble:
	
	<PRE>
	  Gamer: $97,500
	  Programmer: $115,000
	  You should be a gamer and not a programmer?  false
	</PRE>
	
	Run your program for multiple values of <i>p</i> to be sure that your output
	makes sense.

Now lets assume that you DON\'T have a linear value of wealth. Lets assume that your utility for wealth given your job differs as follows:

* EU (Gamer):  3\*sqrt(wealth)

* EU (Programmer):  2\*sqrt(wealth)

Now:

1. Take the values for the wealth for the two jobs that you got before, and plug them into the above utility functions

2. Print both outcomes and a message that indicates whether you should
	accept the gamer job over the programmer job depending on which one will give you the most utility, according to your calculation.