---
name: Home Owning
week: 991
number: 99
points: 4
---

Authors:

* Nathan Vogt
* Elie Schramm

In this assignment,
you
compare the monthly cost of renting vs. owning a home in the St. Louis area 
The following tasks will test your knowledge of 

* Creating a class
* Getting input from user
* Printing to the console
* Understanding primitive types
* Utilizing <KBD>Math.round</KBD>

Let's suppose that in deciding where you want to live, you have the
following choices:

**Renting**

When you rent, you pay a fixed amount of money each month,
and you may continue this arrangement indefinitely.

**Owning**

The price of a home is typically larger than one can afford
up-front.   Thus, most home owners acquire a loan from a bank or
some other funding source.  To pay off the loan, let's assume you
make a fixed payment each month.  Some of that payment is applied to
the amount of money you borrowed, called the <EM>principal</EM>.
The rest of the payment is applied to the <EM>interest</EM> that you must
pay to the lending agency for the privilege of borrowing the money.

In evaluating whether to rent or to own, one consideration is the 
amount of money you pay without return each week or year.  Rent brings
no return whatsoever, as the owner of the apartment simply keeps all rent.

On the other hand, the money you pay via a mortage partially
pays for the house, which brings you value, but partially goes to the
lender (the interest portion).

Thus, one way to compare which is better for you is to consider 
rent vs. interest paid per week or year.

1. In the <KBD> extensions</KBD> folder of your repository, find
	the <KBD>homeowning</KBD> package and open the <KBD>HomeOwning</KBD> class 
	file. 

2. For each of the following items, think about the right data type to
	represent that item, and place code in your <KBD>HomeOwning</KBD> class
	to prompt for the corresponding inputs:
	
	* the name of the apartment complex
	* the zip code of the apartment

	In the United States, 5-digit zip codes are integers.  But what is
	the right data type for a zip code?  In computer science, we rely more
	on how an item is <EM>used</EM> rather than how it appears.  Integers,
	for example, are most of often the subject of simple math operations.

	Will the zip code be involved with any calculations?

	If not, then what data type is a better choice for a zip code?

3. the monthly rent of the apartment.  Assume this can be specified
	as an integer (e.g., 600 dollars).

4. the daily interest payment for your mortgage on the house.  This is not necessarily an integral number of dollars (may involve cents).

	However, any price in US currency can be represented as an integer if
	we consider the price in <EM>cents</EM>.
	<p>
	In working with money,
	computer scientists typically avoid <KBD>double</KBD> data types, because
	they sometimes approximate an intended value. Thus, 
	$123.45 can be represented as the integer 12345 in cents
	per month.

After prompting for the above inputs, your task is to provide the following report:

* The name of the property and its zip code

* The rent for a year, shown in dollars (no cents)

* The rent for a week, rounded to the nearest cent

* The interest payments for a year, shown in dollars and cents

* The interest payments for a week, rounded to the nearest cent

* Your decision, based on cost, of whether to rent or own, based
	on which is cheaper

##Sample input and output
Although you must prompt for inputs, below is an example of data
you might see and the output you would produce based on
those inputs.

**Sample Inputs**

<TABLE>
<TR> <TD><KBD>Name</KBD>       </TD><TD> <KBD>Vanguard Crossing</KBD></TD> </TR>
<TR> <TD><KBD>Zip Code</KBD>   </TD><TD> <KBD>63104</KBD></TD> </TR>
<TR> <TD> <KBD>Monthly Rent</KBD>      </TD><TD> <KBD>600</KBD></TD> </TR>
<TR> <TD> <KBD>Daily Interest</KBD>  </TD><TD> <KBD>31.99</KBD></TD> </TR>
</TABLE>

The following output would be produced:

<PRE>
Vanguard Crossing is located in the Zip Code 63104
Rent per year: 7200
Rent per week: 138.46

Interest paid per year: 11676.35
Interest paid per week: 223.93

I should rent
</PRE>

##Should you move?
Your apartment manager decides to increase your rent to $980 per month.  
Assuming that ownership is still an option for you with the same mortgage 
interest
payments, should you continue to rent or should you own?