---
name: One-Rep Max Weight Calculator
week: 2
number: 2
points: 3
---

Authors:
  
* Devin Goodkin
* [Ron Cytron](http://www.cs.wustl.edu/~cytron/)

*Disclaimer*:  

> * The values computed in this assignment are based on
> published formulas, but you are advised to undertake this and all forms of
> exercise with the advice and consent of a physician.  
> 
> * In particular, performing
> a one-rep max movement unprepared or unsupervised can result in injury. 
>
> * You are therefore especially cautioned against that form of training without 
> adequate supervision and coaching.
>
> 
> **The authors of this extension and all personnel involved
> with this course are not licensed medical
> care providers; they represent that they have no exepertise in
> diagnosing, examining, or treating medical conditions of any kind,
> nor in determining the effects of any specific exercise.**
> 
> The data computed by this exercise are for informational and instructional
> purposes only.

##Overview

In weight training, the volume of work completed in
one exercise (often called a *set*) is typically specified as a given weight that
is moved a specified number of times.  These are respectively
called the *weight* and *reps* (abbreviates repetitions)
of that set.

In this extension, you will create a one-rep max calculator. 
This calculator hypothetically calculates a weight that a subject
could move for one repetition, given that the same subject can successfully
complete *r* reps (in the range of
2 -> 12) at a lighter weight.

> * Beyond 12 reps,
> the formula we use is not considered  accurate. 
>
> * The stated value for *r* is generally considered to be 
> the number of times the weight
> can be moved before *failure*:  the subject can complete *r* reps
> at the stated weight, but no more.

While a person may never attempt that one-rep max movement, the one-rep 
max weight is canonical, in that it can then be used to compute
lighter weights that should be feasible for the subject at a desired number
of reps.

Your solution will compute and print:

* The one-rep max weight based on a formula described below.
* The weight that should be feasible for a stated number of reps.
* Percentages of the one-rep max weight from 95% to 50% in decrements of 5%.

##Example

Consider a subject who can successfully
[bench](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bench_press)
225 pounds 10 times before failure.   

* What is this subjects current one-rep max bench weight?
* How much weight should that subject be able to bench to get 5 reps before failure?
* What percentage of this subject\'s max bench is the weight that can
be benched 5 times?

**Input**

* Successful weight:  225 pounds
* Successful reps: 10
* Desired reps:  5

**Output**


	One-rep max: 300
	Weight for 5 reps: 255
	95% 1 RM: 285
	90% 1 RM: 270
	85% 1 RM: 255
	80% 1 RM: 240
	75% 1 RM: 225
	70% 1 RM: 210
	65% 1 RM: 195
	60% 1 RM: 180
	55% 1 RM: 165
	50% 1 RM: 150


##Procedure

* First take a look at 
[this one-rep max](http://www.exrx.net/Calculators/OneRepMax.html)
caculator.  

* If you try it for some sample values, you will see that it
produces results that may not work in an actual gym, because the smallest plate
one can find in most gyms is 2.5 pounds.  

* Our calculator takes in a third input, which is how many reps the person 
wants to perform, 
and calculates a weight to be performed at that number of reps.

* Our 
[one-rep max](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One-repetition_maximum)
calculations will be based on the 
[Epley Formula](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One-repetition_maximum#Epley_Formula),
so study that material sufficiently well to complete this extension.

* Create a **OneRepMax** class in the **onerepmax** package
of the **extensions** folder.

* Arrange for that program to prompt the user for the inputs needed for
this computation.

* Compute and print the results as shown in the sample ouptut above for
the inputs provided in the run of your code.

* You must:

	* Check that the inputs provided are reasonable. Print a suitable message and
	exit if any inputs are unreasonable.
	* Use iteration to produce the table of percentages of the one-rep max
	weight.
	* Produce weight values that are rounded to the nearest **5 pounds**,
	so that the least weight needed on a bar is 2.5 pounds on each side.

