---
name: Pascal's Triangle
week: 3
number: 1
points: 3
---

Authors

: Robert Sedgewick (book)

Take a look at the Wikipedia page on [Pascal\'s Triangle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pascal%27s_triangle){:target="_blank"}.  We will implement this using
a two-dimensional array, so it may be easier to imagine the entries left-justified rather than
in triangular form:

<PRE>
        column
        0  1  2  3  4
row
0       1
1       1  1
2       1  2  1
3       1  3  3  1
4       1  4  6  4  1
        .
        .
        .
</PRE>

Viewed as a two-dimensional array, the computation is specified
as follows, for each entry at row *r* and column *c*:

* If *c* is 0, then the entry is `1`.
* If *c*`==`*r*, then the entry is `1`.
* If *r*`<0` or *c*`<0` or *c*`>`*r*, then the entry is `0` and is not shown.
* Everywhere else, the entry is computed as the sum of the entries at:
	* *r*`-1`,*c*
	* *r*`-1`,*c*`-1`

##Procedure

1. Open the `PascalsTriangle` class, found in the `arrays` package of the `extensions` folder.

2. Insert code to obtain from the user the value *N* which is the number of rows you should compute of the triangle.

3. Instantiate the two-dimensional array needed to hold the results.

	>Java lets you do this as a *ragged* array, where each row can be of
	>a different length.  
	>
	>You are welcome to instantiate the array that way, but
	>it is simpler and equally acceptable to instantiate the array with the same 
	>number of columns in each row.  Java syntax for that is *much* simpler.
	>An example of this appears in [`SelfAvoidingWalk`](https://introcs.cs.princeton.edu/java/14array/SelfAvoidingWalk.java.html){:target="_blank"},which is contained in the [Computer Science: An Interdisciplinary Approach](https://introcs.cs.princeton.edu/java/home/){:target="_blank"}, a text book commonly used for courses like 131 and which was used for some of the resources and examples used in 131.

4. Compute the triangle as a two-dimensional array and print the results  left-justified as shown above.

5. *Demo a version that prints using the above format*, but for extra fun try to print the triangle centered as shown on the [Wikipedia page](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pascal%27s_triangle){:target="_blank"}.