---
name: Stock Scraper
week: 4
number: 9
points: 5
---

Authors

: <a href="https://www.linkedin.com/in/timothyheyer">Tim Heyer</a>
: <a href="http://www.cs.wustl.edu/~cytron/">Ron Cytron</a>


It is <i>highly recommended</i> that you complete the String Theory assignment before attempting this assignment.

Additionally, this assignment builds off of the Web Scraper assignment and it is recommended that you complete that assignment 
prior to attempting this one. If you decide to work on this assignment without having completed the former, it is, however, 
necessary that you watch the two videos provided in the Web Scraper assignment in order to fully understand this assignment.

##Overview
Stocks represent equity ownership in a company and can either be rapidly traded for the purpose of profiting from price 
fluctuations or can be held in the long-term for the purpose of developing a substantial stake in a corporation which 
grants voting rights and a general "say" in the day-to-day operations of the company, among other things. As such, it 
can be useful to know the current stock price in real-time in order to track changes and monitor an investment.

In this assignment, you will access the Yahoo! Finance website, store the HTML code of the website in a `String`, 
and extract the current stock price of a company, along with some other useful information. You will use the API provided 
through `Jsoup` to download and store the HTML code of the website, which you learned how to do through the 
aforementioned Web Scraper assignment videos. Once you\'ve stored the HTML code of the website in a `String`, 
you will then analyze the code to find the relevant information and a corresponding unique identifying `String` 
which will allow you to locate and extract it.

##Procedure

1. Use `ArgsProcessor` to prompt the user for the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ticker_symbol" target = "new"> stock symbol</a> to look up.

2. For the stock symbol given, use `Jsoup` to retrieve the HTML code of the Yahoo! Finance webpage and store  it as a `String`, as shown in the aforementioned video.

3. Look at the HTML source code (as described in the previous assignment\'s videos) and look for unique `String`s that will  allow you to identify and then extract the relevant stock information.

	Specifically, you are looking for three different pieces of information that you will extract and print.

	* The full name of the company in question.
	* The current price of the stock.
	* The percent daily change in stock price. (This is provided as its own element in the HTML code and therefore does  not require any computation on your part)

4. Use the unique `String`s to locate the information, and then extract and store them to variables.

5. Print out the information in a format similar to the one shown below:

##Example

Input: INTC

Stock information for Intel Corporation <br>
The current stock price is $34.94 which is up 1.63% from yesterday.

It will be helpful to use some methods from the `String` class. The following describes some useful methods, 
assuming they are called on a target `String t`: 

<br>

[int indexof(String str)](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/lang/String.html#indexOf%28java.lang.String%29" target="doc")

: Finds the location of the specified `str` in `t`.

<br>

[char charAt(int i)](http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/lang/String.html#charAt(int))

: Returns the character at index `i` in `t`.

Three particular static methods may also be useful for this assignment. Recall that static methods are not called 
on a target variable as in the previously described methods, but rather are called on a generic object of that type.

<br>

[boolean Character.isDigit(char c)](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/lang/Character.html#isDigit(char)" target="doc")

: Returns true if `c` is a digit and false otherwise.

<br>

[String Character.toString(char c)](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/lang/Character.html#toString(char)" target="doc")

: Returns the `String` representation of a character.

<br>

[int Integer.parseInt(String s)]( https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/lang/Integer.html#parseInt(java.lang.String)" target="doc")

: Returns the `int` representation of a String.

## Demo
Show your TA the output and run the program with multiple different stock tickers.
