---
name: Build your own Calculator!
week: 99
number: 3
points: 5
---

Authors

: Arman Guerra

## A How-To Guide

In this extension you shall complete the functionality of a calculator. You accomplish this by creating a series of methods that 
use the arithmetic, `String`, `boolean`, and casting operations. 


* In eclipse, open the `calculator` package found in
	the `extensions` source folder.
	
* You will find the following Java files:

`Computations`

: This is where you will be writing your code. 

`Calculator`

: This is what you will run when you are finished writing all of your methods. This class creates a GUI, 
	[Graphic User Interface](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphical_user_interface). This is what you see when you run `Calculator`, an 
	interface that allows the user to interact with the code. `Calculator` will not run until you are finished writing all of your methods, so 
	if you want to check your code, use the unit test provided.
	
`ComputationsTest`

: This is the unit test for this extension. Your code must pass this test for you to earn credit. You can check your methods with 
	test as you go. We recommend that you check intermittently to see if you are writing your code correctly, so that if you\'re making a mistake, you 
	can catch yourself early.

## Procedure

You will be writing two kinds of methods. The first kind will be the operational methods, which take in two parameters, and return the result of 
some operation. For example:

```
// Returns the result of adding d1 and d2.
public static double addDoubles(double d1, double d2) {
	return d1 + d2;
}
```

The second kind of method will be *to* methods, which take in some value, and cast it to the necessary type. For example:

```
// takes in an int and returns a double
public static double intToDouble(int in) {
	return (double)in;
}
```

If the input makes no sense, *throw* an exception. For example, if someone inputs a `String`, converting it to an `int` would make no sense. 

So for the method 

```
 public static int stringToInt(String in) {
	throw new UnsupportedOperationException();
}  
```
 
you would *throw* an exception that indicates that this operation is unsupported.

When you *throw* this exception, our code *catches* the exception, and sends out an error message through the GUI.
You will learn more about this in future classes. 

## Methods
First you will write:


* Double operations, which take in two doubles and output one double:

	* `double addDoubles(double d1, double d2)`
	
	* `double subtractDoubles(double d1, double d2)`
	
	* `double divideDoubles(double d1, double d2)`
	
	* `double multiplyDoubles(double d1, double d2)`

	Make sure that the calculator will not crash if a user tells it to divide by zero. If a user tries to divide by zero, return zero.

	At ths point, and at each subsequent point of arrival, run the unit
	test to see if the changes you have made so far pass the test.  At this
	point, the `double` tests should pass.

* Integer operations, which take in two integers, and output one

	* `int addInts(int i1, int i2)`
	
	* `int subtractInts(int i1, int i2)`
	
	* `int divideInts(int i1, int i2)`
	
	* `int multiplyInts(int i1, int i2)`

	Again, there is a possibility that a user will divide by zero here. <a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YneYiO1r0Ow"> Do the thing</a> detailed above. 

* A String Operation, which takes in two Strings and concatenates them

	* `String concatenate(String s1, String s2)`

* Boolean operations, which take in two booleans and outputs one

	* `boolean andBoolean(boolean b1, boolean b2)` which returns the value of the expression `b1 &amp;&amp; b2`
	
	* `boolean orBoolean(boolean b1, boolean b2)` which returns the value of the expression `b1 || b2`

Then you will write: 

* Double *to* methods, which take in a value and convert it to a double when it makes sense, and throw an error if it doesn\'t make sense.

	* `double intToDouble(int in)`
	
	* `double doubleToDouble(double in)`
	
	* `double stringToDouble(String in)`
	
	* `double booleanToDouble(boolean in)`

* Integer *to* methods, which take in a value and convert it to an integer when it makes sense, and throw an error if it doesn\'t make sense.

	* `int intToInt(int in)`
	
	* `int doubleToInt(double in)`
	
	* `int stringToInt(String in))`
	
	* `int booleanToInt(boolean in)`

* String *to* methods, which take in a value and convert it to a String when it makes sense, and throw an error if it doesn\'t make sense.

	* `String intToString(int in)`
	
	* `String doubleToString(double in)`
	
	* `String stringToString(String in)`
	
	* `String booleanToString(boolean in)`

* Boolean *to* methods, which take in a value and convert it to a boolean when it makes sense, and throw and error if it doesn\'t make sense.

	* `boolean intToBoolean(int in)`
	
	* `boolean doubleToBoolean(double in)`
	
	* `boolean stringToBoolean(String in)`
	
	* `boolean booleanToBoolean(boolean in)`

Each of these methods should be quite short.