---
name: Watermelon Puzzle
week: 5
number: 4
points: 8
---

Authors

: Arman Guerra

Adapted from *Sit and Solve Brainteasers* by Derick Niederman


## Warm Up

Five watermelons, each of different weight, have been weighed in *pairs*
to obtain the following weights:

20, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30, 31

One way to solve this would be to figure out a mathematical algorithm for this number of watermelons and work out the weight of each watermelon. 
Another would be to try all of the possible combinations of weights five watermelons until you found one that has this same set of combinations of weights.
Either way you did it, the specific set of watermelons that produces these weights is

 [ 9, 11, 13, 14, 17 ]

## Procedure
Since we have computers, and know how to write code, trying all of the possible weights of the five watermelons is now much easier. In this extension, 
you will take in an array of 10 weights, and you will try, iteratively, to come up with the individual weights of the five watermelons.


1. Find the code for this extension in the `watermelons` package.

2. Create two methods in the `Watermelons` class. There is one finished method that will help you write the other two 
	methods. The two methods you must create are:

	`int[] allPairSums(int[] nums)`

	: This method must be completed first.  Given the input array
		`nums`, this method computes the pairwise-sum of each distinct
		pair of index values for that array.  For example, given the
		input `{40, 20, 10, 30}`, the method must compute the sums of
		indices 
		`(0,1)`,
		`(0,2)`,
		`(0,3)`,
		`(1,2)`,
		`(1,3)`,
		`(2,3)`, returning the array

		`{60, 50, 70, 30, 50, 40}`

		The ordering of the elements in the returned array does not matter.
		
	`int[] getSolution(int[] originalSums)`

	: This method returns a solution to the puzzle for the array of 10 integers that are passed into it. The ordering of elements
		in the array you produce does not matter, as far as the provided unit test is concerned. 

		The included method, `boolean sameIntArrays(int[] one, int[] two)` 
		will help you with this method. When you pass two integer arrays into `sameIntArrays`, it checks whether the two integer arrays contain the same elements.
		The order of the elements in the arrays does not matter.

3. Make sure you pass the provided unit tests.  Once it does, you will
	have a solution to the puzzle.

	For extra fun, go into the code for the Unit test, and inside the `int[] genSolution()` method, uncomment `List<Integer> ans = genIntsSlow();`
	and comment out `List<Integer> ans = genIntsFast();`. This will pass larger weights into your `int[] getSolution(int[] originalSums)` method, 
	and so the computation will take longer. It could take up to a minute. This is not required, but it is a neat example of a very large computation.