---
name: Jackpot - Actual Game
week: 5
number: 7
points: 7
---

Authors

: Arman Guerra

# Description

In this extension you complete the second step towards creating slots, the classic casino game. In this game, you pull a lever, and the slots rotate, slow down, and eventually land
on some combination. Based on the combination you have the chance to win a certain amount of money. You will create this machine using 
`StdDraw`. 

##Procedure

This step in your implementation of the slots machine must include:

* You can decide: either the slots will slow down and then eventually come to a stop on a random shape, or the user will click, and the shapes will stop.

	Either way, when a slot stops on a shape that shape must appear in the center of the slot, so that the user can tell which shape the slot landed on

* When the slots stop, you should print a message telling the user whether or not any points were scored. If the user hit the Jackpot, congratulations are in order. If not, 
inform the user of this with a morose message, such as "you stink" or [this](https://youtu.be/S3I5XcsReT0?t=10s).

	You can write text using `StdDraw.text(double xCoord, double yCoord, String string)`. If you want to set the font, create a new font and then set that as the font 

		Font f = new Font("Tahoma", Font.PLAIN, 50);
		
		StdDraw.setFont(f);

	`Tahoma` is the name of the font, `Font.plain` is the style, and `50` is the size of the font. 

* You should keep the score of the game and display it every time the slots stop. The score should go up every time the user gets 2 or 3 of a kind, and go down otherwise. 

* Once you display to the user the outcome of the spin, the user should be able to click on the standard draw canvas, and the Jackpot machine should run again.
	
	If you would like to create a button you can, but it is not required, as long as clicking somehow restarts the animation. 

A couple of methods that you might add when you modify your Jackpot machine:

* a `checkStop()` or `slowDown` method that stops the slot when the mouse is pressed or slows it down, depending on your implementation

	If you are going to check if the user clicked to stop the slot, check in your `main()` method, and pass the coordinates of the mouse (using `StdDraw.mouseX()` and `StdDraw.mouseY()`) into the method that decides which slot will stop, as opposed to finding the coordinates of the mouse in the method that you call. There is a tiny widow of time in which the user could move the mouse out of the way, which could cause you to stop the wrong slot.

* one or more methods that draw the screen that appears when the slots stop that show the score and write out whether or not the user won anything

* a `checkIfFinished()` method that returns whether or not all of the slots have stopped moving. 

You can have more or fewer methods, depending on how you want your implementation to work, but having these will save you a lot of code writing.
