---
name: Project - Matrix
week: 7
number: 3
points: 5
---

Authors

: Arman Guerra

##Procedure

In the `matrix` package of the `extensions` source folder, implement the `Matrix` class. Every time you implement a method correctly, you will be able to pass one more unit test. We have provided and finished some methods. We ask that you do not change anything other than the methods listed below. Implement the methods with the following features:

1. A *constructor* that takes a two-dimensional array of type `double` and saves it (as an instance variable) as the values of the matrix.

	To be safe, your instance variable must be a *copy* of the parameter, so that the contents of your Matrix\'s array cannot be changed beyond your control. 

	To copy the two-dimensional array, you must instantiate a new two-dimensional array and copy the original array\'s contents into your new array. Do not use `clone`. It will only clone the first row of the array, and the rest of the rows will be left empty.

2. An `arraysAreEqual(double[][] one, double[][] two)` method that compares the two arrays to see if they are the same.  The two arrays are the same if:

	* They agree in the size of both of their dimensions.
	* The contents of the two arrays are the same.

	The `.equals(Object)` method included with this lab calls your `arraysAreEqual` method, so that `Matrix` equality of two matrices depends on the contents of those matrices.

	Until this method is working, the rest of the JUnit tests will not work properly.

3. A `toString` method that neatly shows the contents of the matrix. In your string use \"\n\" to insert a line break, and use \"\t\" where you want a tab between elements. Include JUnit tests that print these strings to the console (using `System.out.println`) for visual inspection, in addition to any automated tests you perform. Your toString method will come in handy for debugging the other methods.

4. A `scaleRow` method that takes a row number (an integer) and a scale factor (a double), and multiplies that row by the given scale factor.  This method does not return anything.  It just modifies the matrix.

	In this lab, rows are numbered as arrays are indexed.  Thus, the top row in the matrix is row 0, and the bottom row is numbered one less than the number of rows in the matrix.


5. An `addRows` method that takes two row numbers as parameters, and adds the two rows together, storing the result in place of the second of the two rows.

6. A `plus` method that takes another Matrix as its parameter and returns the matrix that results from adding this matrix by the given one. Matrix addition is only valid when the two matrices are the same size in both dimensions, so your `plus` method should throw an IllegalArgumentException when this is not the case.

7. A `transpose` method that takes no parameters and returns a new matrix that is the transpose of this one.  Recall that the columns of the transposed matrix have the same values as the rows of the original matrix.

8. A `times` method that takes another Matrix as its parameter and returns the matrix that results from multiplying this matrix by the given one. Recall that when you multiply two matrices A and B, the value in the cell at row *r* and column *c* of the resulting matrix is the dot product of A\'s row *r* with B\'s column *c*. Also recall that matrix multiplication is only valid when the number
of columns of the first matrix is equal to the number of rows of the second, so your `times` method should throw an IllegalArgumentException when this is not the case.

9. An `exchangeRows` method that takes in two rows i and j and exchanges the two. This modifies the matrix and does not return anything.



##To Demo

Your code must pass all of the unit tests.