---
name: 6-1-4-5 - How To Be Famous
week: 99
number: 7
points: 8
---

Much has been written about the tendency for musicians from <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johann_Pachelbel">Pachelbel</a> to <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pink_%28singer%29">Pink</a> to write songs based on a common chord progression:

* <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_songs_containing_the_I-V-vi-IV_progression"> I-V-vi-IV</a>
* <a href="http://sixfouronefive.blogspot.com/"> Six Four One Five </a>
* <a href="http://www.boston.com/ae/music/articles/2008/12/31/striking_a_chord/">Striking a Chord</a>

In response of this, the <a href="http://www.axisofawesome.net/">Axis of Awesome</a> has realized that the only barrier to their becoming famous is their lack of a four-chord song, as documented extensively in <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oOlDewpCfZQ">this amazing video</a> and <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QpB_40hYjXU">this other amazing video</a>.

Axis of Awesome needs **your help** to record their soon-to-be-hit four-chord song.

In this extension, you use the `chords.music` classes you developed above to create a 4-chord song.  The song consists of two `Samples` of music, *background* and *tune*, which are `combine`d throughout to make a song.  As the song plays, you can control how much of what you hear is background and how much is tune.

##Overview

* Open the `SixFourOneFive` class in the `chords` package. Your work for this extension will be done in this class.

* A `TwoDimensionalGUI` class is provided for your use in the `chords.gui` package.  

	To see how it works

	* Run the `TwoDimensionalGUIExample` and move your mouse in the window to control the size and shading of the displayed circle.
	* Read the constructor and the code in the class.
	* You can instantiate this class yourself and use it to select the amount of background and tune present in your sound output.

* The code you write will resemble the example GUI and all other programs based on an *event loop*.
  
* Each iteration of your infinite event loop prepares four seconds of sound for output.  

	* These four seconds are one musical measure.
	* Each measure has four beats 
	* Each second of time corresponds to one beat of the four-beat measure 


	Thus, each measure goes through the four chords of your four-chord song, with one second spent on each chord.
* The music you generate consists of background (chords) and a tune:

	**Background**

	The background of your song is a constant progression of Six-Four-One-Five chords.  These chords can be generated using the classes you have above as follows:

	* If you construct a `DiatonicScale` with starting pitch `3`,  then its scale is C major starting on high C.
	* Although the chord pattern is called Six Four One Five, this assumes the root chord is One.  For us, the root chord is `0`, so the diatonic offsets for our chords are really `5 3 0 4`.
	* That `5` chord is a bit high and sqeaky, so we lower it by an octave, subtracting 7 diatonic steps to get `-2`. The resulting chord sequence in terms of diatonic offsets is

	`-2 3 0 4`
	
	* If we name the `DiatonicScale` of interest `ds`, then the  triads of interest are as follows:
	
	<TABLE>
	<TR> <TH>Chord</TH> <TH> Name in C major</TH> <TH> Triad </TH> </TR>
	<TR> <TD > Six </TD> <TD > a minor </TD> <TD > new Triad(ds, -2) </TD> </TR>
	<TR> <TD > Four </TD> <TD > F major </TD> <TD > new Triad(ds,  3) </TD> </TR>
	<TR> <TD > One </TD> <TD > C major </TD> <TD > new Triad(ds,  0)</TD> </TR>
	<TR> <TD > Five </TD> <TD > G major </TD> <TD > new Triad(ds,  4)  </TD> </TR>
	</TABLE>

	Because `Triad`s are constructed relative to a `DiatonicScale`, the `Triad` instantiations above create Six Four One Five for whatever key the `DiatonicScale` object was constructed.

	The background consists of rotating among the above chords, with each chord playing for one second (a quarter note).

	**Tune**

	The tune is generated randomly, with each note having random pitch and duration:

	**Duration**
  
	* Each chord of the background lasts for one second, and you need to generate a one-second tune to be combined and played with the background.
	* You could pick a single note for the one second, but that would not be rhythmically interesting.
	* Instead, let\'s begin with a nominal beat that is one second in duration.  
	* That beat could be subdivided into two beats of half the original duration, so two half-second notes.
	* The process of subdividing could continue to obtain smaller rhythmic units such as four quarter-second notes, eight eighth-second notes, etc.
	* No matter how much we subdivide the beat, the resulting rhythmic units sum to one second when played continguously.
    * If the above process is not somewhat random, the resulting rhythms would still be quite regular and uninteresting.

	Your challange is to devise a method for randomly breaking a one-second beat into smaller units.  The units should not always be the same.  For example, one way to divide one second might result in the following, played consecutively:

	* 2 eighth-second notes
	* 1 eighth-second note
	* 2 sixteenth-second notes 
	* 1 quarter-second note
	* 1 quarter-second note


	**Pitch**

	Once one of the above rhythmic units is complete, its pitch should be chosen from a <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diatonic_scale">diatonic scale</a> in the key of C major. Construct a `DiatonicScale(3)` object and use its `getPitch(int)` to get a random diatonic pitch from the C-major scale.