---
name: Sad Cycles
week: 8
number: 1
points: 3
---

Authors

: Fede Rozenberg

## Overview

So it turns out that numbers can feel things. We define a happy or sad number through this process:

1. Split up the number into its digits.

2. Square the digits and sum them.

3. Repeat with the new sum until you reach a set of numbers that repeat or the number 1.

4. If your process results in a repeating 1, your initial number was happy! Otherwise, it has fallen into a cycle of depression, characterized by the repeating numbers `[4, 16, 37, 58, 89, 145, 42, 20, 4...]` How sad.


For example, starting with the number 15, our process yields:

* 1<sup>2</sup> + 5<sup>2</sup> = 26
* 2<sup>2</sup> + 6<sup>2</sup> = 40
* 4<sup>2</sup> + 0<sup>2</sup> = 16
* 1<sup>2</sup> + 6<sup>2</sup> = 37
* 3<sup>2</sup> + 7<sup>2</sup> = 58

Here you can see our number has fallen into the beginning stages of depression...

In this extension you will be designing a program that uses `sets` to find the sad cycle of a number for an arbitrary power.

## Procedure

In the `sadcycle` package of your `extensions` folder, create a `SadCycler` class.

* Create a method `Set<Long> findCycle(int base, long n)` that takes in a number `n` and either returns a `Set<Long>` with the `base`-sad cycle for `n` or with 1 as its only element.

	A `long` is simply twice as long as an `int`. I recommend using it here because some of the numbers found in higher `base`-sad cycles can be quite large.

* Feel free to create any other methods you might need.

	I highly recommend partitioning the splitting of digits, raising to the power of `base`, and summing into one method. The trick here is figuring out how to treat every digit in a number as its own entity.

* Test your program on inputs you find documented <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Happy_number">here</a>.  Show these results to a TA and convince him or her they are right for credit on this assignment.