---
name: More ListItem Methods -  the List Goes On
week: 9
number: 1
points: 4
---

##Procedure

In the file **ListItem.java**, write **static** methods
that satisfy the following specifications.  Remember that static methods are called directly on the ListItem class itself, rather than on ListItem objects.

**Create JUnit tests to test each method thoroughly.**

Recall that to call static methods of the ListItem class from your JUnit test methods, you can specify the class name each time, as in `ListItem.evenElements(ls)`.  Alternatively, you can save characters and just write `evenElements(ls)` if you import the static methods from the ListItem class by adding the line

`import static lab9.ListItem.*;`

near the top of your file, after the package declaration.

As you work through these exercises, be sure to use recursion or iteration as indicated.  Where not indicated, you may choose either approach.  Each method will take references to list items as
parameters. Unless otherwise specified, **you should handle the case of a null parameter value.**


1. A **recursive** static procedure `pairwiseSum`

	<PRE>
	PARAMETERS:   two ListItem references, ls1 an ls2
	RETURN VALUE: a ListItem at the front of a new list containing the pairwise
				  sum of the elements in ls1 and ls2
					 for example, given lists ( 3 2 6 ) and ( 1 4 2), 
					 the return value would be the list ( 4 6 8 )
	</PRE>
	You may assume that the given lists are the same length.

2. An **iterative** static procedure `smallElements`
	
	<PRE>
	PARAMETERS:   a ListItem reference, ls
				  an integer n
	RETURN VALUE: a new list identical to the given list, except
				  that it contains no occurrences of numbers greater than n.
				  for example, given input list ( 3 2 6 3 4 ) and 3,
					 the return value would be the list ( 3 2 3 )
	</PRE>

3. An **iterative** static procedure `scale`
	
	<PRE>
	PARAMETERS:   a ListItem reference, ls
				  an integer n
	RETURN VALUE: none (void)
				  the procedure **mutates** the list by multiplying
				  each number in the list by the given number n.
					 for example, given input lists ( 3 2 6 3 4) and
					 the number 3,
					 the modified list would be ( 9 6 18 9 12 ).
	</PRE>

4. A static procedure `insertAfter`
	
	<PRE>
	PARAMETERS:   a ListItem reference, ls
				  two integers i and j (not equal)
	RETURN VALUE: none (void)
				  the procedure **mutates** the list by inserting the
				  given number i after each occurrence of j.
					 for example, given input lists ( 3 2 6 3 4) and
					 the number 5 and 3,
					 the modified list would be ( 3 5 2 6 3 5 4 ).
	</PRE>

	Be sure to do this by creating new list items only for the inserted numbers.  Modifying the `next` references in the existing ListItem objects to insert the new items in the right places. Don\'t create a whole new list structure.
