---
title: Game of Nim
week: 2
assigned: 2018-06-05
due: 2018-06-12
---

You can access the repository for this assignment <a href="https://classroom.github.com/a/fihs845R">here</a>.

# Game of [Nim](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nim)
[Nim](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nim) is a [game of strategy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strategy_game) in which two players take turns removing sticks from a common pile. There are many variations of Nim
but for the purposes of this assignment, we will stick with a simple and common implementation. On each turn, a player must remove either 1 or 2 sticks
from the pile. The goal of the game is to be the player who removes the last stick.

In this assignment, you will design a game in which one human player is competing against a computer. To simplify your work the computer will always take the first turn.

It\'s important to note that while there *is* a winning strategy for this game, you are required only to implement a computer player which employs random moves.

Example output of one game:

<PRE>
Computer starts
Round 0, 7 sticks at start, computer took 2, so 5 sticks remain
Round 1, 5 sticks at start, human took 1, so 4 sticks remain
Round 2, 4 sticks at start, computer took 2, so 2 sticks remain
Round 3, 2 sticks at start, human took 1, so 1 sticks remain
Round 4, 1 sticks at start, computer took 1, so 0 sticks remain
Computer wins
</PRE>

## Notes

* Begin by prompting the user for the initial number of sticks. In the example above, it appears that 7 sticks were used in the game.
* The computer (as always in this assignment) made the first move.
* Clearly, the human could have played better in the above game.
* The computer randomly removes 1 or 2 sticks, but cannot remove more sticks than are left.
* The human is prompted at each turn for how many sticks he or she wants to remove.
^
Be careful!  A human might enter 5 if 5 sticks are left, and if you are not careful, the human could win by [playing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheating) in that way.

Don\'t accept the user\'s input if it is illegal.  Continue prompting until you get a valid input.

* Start your work by creating a `Nim` class in the `lab2` package.. 
* Use `ArgsProcessor` to prompt for inputs.
* Your program must continue play until somebody (computer or human) wins.
* Your output should resemble the sample output shown above.
* When you demo this assignment, be prepared to discuss how you would implement a dominant strategy with your TA


# Submitting your work

To submit your work, contact the instructor or a TA. They will walk you through the submission process. Be prepared to show them the work that you have done and answer their questions about it!
