---
title: APIsolutely About Zombies
week: 4
assigned: 2018-06-26
due: 2018-07-03
---

You can access the repository for this assignment <a href="https://classroom.github.com/a/hrims6ZP" target="_blank">here</a>.

* This will be a TOC
{:toc}

# APIsolutely About Zombies

This assignment is the first step in a sequence of assignments that will simulate [zombies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zombie){:target="_blank"}!.   In this part you will prepare the simulation data and display the entites being simulated (the zombies and non-zombies/humans).  In the next part (Lab 5) we will actually simulate the interaction between the two.  

There are a few reasons for this somewhat silly choice of subject matter:
* Hopefully these assignments will give you a sense of real-world applications of computing that may be of interest to you.   The structure we will create is used in many simulations and games: 
  * Many games and simulations have a loop that simulates time steps.  The typical flow of this loop is:
  1. Check if the game/simulation should continue (part of in Lab 5)
  2. Update all the items being simulated for the current time step (part in Lab 5)
  3. Show or record any progress (We'll do this here in Lab 4)
* Using zombies allows us to simplify the simulation of a biological system (i.e., shorter assignments focused on the C.S. concepts we want you to learn):
  * Zombies are "undead".  We won't bother to simulate a life/death cycle. 
  * Zombie infection transmission can be handled with a simple rule: If a non-zombie touches a zombie, it becomes a zombie.
  * Zombie motion is a little random, which makes it easy to simulate
* [Halloween](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halloween){:target="_blank"} is only a few weeks away. Zombies are a popular Halloween theme, so this is a good time to study zombie culture.
* We will also practice our current topic, Input, Output, and APIs. 
  
# Information Needed 

In order to simulate the interactions between zombies and non-zombies, we have to identify the information needed for our simulation.  In this case we want to examine how a zombie infection can spread.  We will simulate:
* Zombies, which have a location.
  * Our world will be a simple 2D grid with walls around all sides. Consequently, location is just a 2D point.  We will use real numbers for locations and assume the borders of our world are (0,0) and (1,1).
* Non-Zombies, which also have a 2D location

We will have a collection of "entities" to simulate: Humans and Zombies. Lets assume that we have `N` entites in total. We can now focus on keeping track of coordinates and the "type" of entity associated with those coordinates.  We can use a numeric code to keep track of the entity type, like use a `1` to indicate a Zombie and a `2` to indicate a non-zombie (we could extend this to other types too, like entites that are immune).  

## Data Management

There are a variety of ways to manage information like this.  We will start with the simplest approach possible using the tools we've covered so far, but we'll update the approach in later assignments to use techniques with different strengths/weaknesses.  For this assignment we'll use an approach sometimes called [parallel arrays](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_array){:target="_blank"}.  The basic idea is that we'll have a collection of three arrays: 
1. An array of length `N` that indicates the type of each entity being simulated.  Call the the `type` array.
2. An array of length `N` that indicates a x coordinate of an entity.  Call this the `x` array.
3. An array of length `N` that indicates the y coordinate of an entity. Call this the `y` array.

Each thing being simulated will be associated with an index.  For example, `type[0]`, `x[0]`, and `y[0]` represent the type and coordinates of a single entity in our simulation.   In a sense you can think about `type`, `x`, and `y` as being columns in a table.  The individual rows of the table represent a specific thing being simulated.  

## Data Encoding

The initial locations of zombies and non-zombies will be provided in a file.  The file will have a very specific format:
* The first line of the file will indicate how many entities are in the file (`N`)
* The next `N` lines will each contain information for a single entity:
  * Each line will start with an integer, 1 or 2. 1 indicates a zombie and 2 indicates a non-zombie.
  * Second will be a real number (`double`) indicating the initial x position of the entity.
  * Third will be another real number (`double`) indicating the initial y position of the entity.

We've included several example files.  You should be able to access them by using only the file name (like `aZombie.sim`)
* `aZombie.sim`: A single zombie in the middle of the world
* `aNonzombie.sim`: A single non-zombie in the middle of the world
* `zombies.sim`: 5 zombies on the diagonal from the top left corner of the world to the middle.
* `nonzombies.sim`: 5 non-zombis on the diagonal from the middle of the world to the bottom right.
* `zombieWorld.sim`: Lots of zombies and non-zombies!

# APIs

This assignment will utilize the APIs provided by Sedgewick.  We will use two specific features:
* [`In`](https://introcs.cs.princeton.edu/java/stdlib/javadoc/In.html){:target="_blank"}: This allows us to read data from a file.  We'll get the locations of all entities from a file.
* [`StdDraw`](https://introcs.cs.princeton.edu/java/stdlib/javadoc/StdDraw.html){:target="_blank"}:  This will allow us to display the location of the zombies and non-zombies as our simulation progresses.  
  
# Assignment Requirements

Your work needs to:
1. Prompt users for the name of the file that will include the initial locations of entities.
2. Read all the information from that file and store it in parallel arrays.  Use Sedgewick's [`In`](https://introcs.cs.princeton.edu/java/stdlib/javadoc/In.html){:target="_blank"} API. 
3. Display all the elements in the simulation using Sedgewick's [`StdDraw`](https://introcs.cs.princeton.edu/java/stdlib/javadoc/StdDraw.html){:target="_blank"}.
   * For full credit you *must* read in all entites and store them in arrays before displaying anything.  (This structure will make future assignments easier)
   * Zombies should be displayed with filled red circles with a radius of `0.005`.
   * Non-Zombies should be displayed with filled black circles with a radius of `0.005`.

# Procedure

* Open the `ZombieData` in the `lab4` package.  Some items have already been done for you.
* Prompt the user for the file name to use using the `ArgsProcessor`.
* Review Sedgewick's [`In`](https://introcs.cs.princeton.edu/java/stdlib/javadoc/In.html){:target="_blank"} API.  It can be used almost exactly like you use the `ArgsProcessor`.  An `in` object has already been created for you. 
* 
  * Read in the first line of the file (the `N`)
  * Create arrays of appropriate size (for the "parallel data").
  * Read in each additional piece of data.  Remember the format: `int`, `double`, `double`




# Submitting your work:

To submit your work, contact the instructor or a TA. They will walk you through the submission process. Be prepared to show them the work that you have done and answer their questions about it!
