---
title: Resource Allocation Algorithms
week: 10
assigned: 2019-11-21
due: 2019-11-21
---

# Warmup

* You must work in pairs for most of this studio, so arrange yourselves into groups of exactly 2.  Feel free to move around the room.  If there are an odd number of students, someone will be paired with a TA.
* There is no need to write code for this studio.  Just keep this page open and follow along.


# Dividing a piece of cake

For your first activity, each pair of students will consider dividing a cake in two parts, one for each person. A few things about the cake, the people involved, and cutting the cake:

* ***The Cake*** 
  * It has different toppings on it.  The toppings on our simulated cake are depicted with colored rectangles.
  * To save toner, the rectangles (toppings) are drawn with an X, but assume they are a solid color (that is, the upper-right rectangle should be considered solid red --- or all of one topping).
* ***The People***
  * Each person has a strong preference for a single topping.  They don't care about the rest of the cake in any way.
* ***The Cutting***
  * A "cut" is a *single* line through the cake that divides it into two parts. The line may be at any angle.
  * You'll draw your cut on the cake.
  * You'll only cut the cake once.

## Dividing the Cake

You may be wondering how two people can find an acceptable way to divide the cake using just one cut.  The strategy we'll explore is  ***"one cuts, the other chooses"***, where one person is the cutter and the other is the chooser.  As the name implies:
<ul>
<ol>
<li> The "cutter" chooses how to cut the cake (a single, straight cut through the cake at any angle)</li>
<li>The "chooser" picks which piece they get. The "cutter" gets the remaining piece.</li>
</ol>
</ul>

## Pre-Activity Question

1. Think individually about this cake dividing strategy.  Would you rather be the **cutter** or the **chooser**?  Why?

### Cutting Problem 1

1. Decide in each pair who will be the cutter and who will be the chooser.  If you can't agree you can use [Random.org's list randomizer](https://www.random.org/lists/) with your names.
2. The TA will now randomly and secretly assign each person a color that they prefer (both may prefer the same color!).
  * TAs: Click "Randomize Colors" below for each person.  The top choice in the list will be the color/topping that they prefer. (Communicate the preference discreetly, such that the other person they're working with isn't aware of it)
    <form style="display:inline;" method="post" action="https://www.random.org/lists/"><textarea style="display:none" cols="60" rows="10" name="list">Pink&#13;&#10;Red&#13;&#10;Blue&#13;&#10;Green&#13;&#10;Orange&#13;&#10;Purple</textarea><input type="hidden" name="format" value="html"><input type="hidden" name="rnd" value="new"><input type="hidden" name="count" value="1">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;<input type="submit" style="color:#1d7aff;" value="Randomize Colors">
    </form>
3. Carry out the **one cuts, the other chooses** protocol.
4. Reveal your preference to your partner and decide who got more of their preferred color (TAs, make sure they're honest about their preferences!).

### Cutting Problem 2

"It's not enough that I succeed;  my friends must also fail" -- Mike Caplinger, 1978

1. Flip again for **cutter** vs. **chooser**
2. TAs will randomly assigns preferences again
3. Carry out the protocol again, but:
  * ***Cutters*** this time you win by getting as much of your preferred color as possible and by depriving your partner of as much of their preferred color as you can.  So you  should determine a straight line that guarantees at least half of your preferred color for you but deprives the other person of as much of their color as possible.  Of course you don't know the other person's preferences, so you'll have to decide how you can minimize their access to any color.
4. Reveal your preference to your partner and decide who got more of their preferred color (TAs, again make sure they're honest about their preferences!).

### Cutting Problem 3

1. Flip again for **cutter** vs. **chooser**
2. TAs will randomly assigns preferences again, but this time they preferences are ***NOT SECRET***.  Both the cutter's and the chooser's prefernces are know to the 
3. Scoring will be as with Problem 2.  The Cutter both wants a lot of their color and wants to minimize the chooser's happiness. 
4. Decide who got more of their preferred color.

### One cuts, the other chooses: Automation

Take a few minutes to talk amongst yourselves and with your TA about how this procedure could be automated via a computer program.

### Quick Survey

Each person should click [here]() to (individually) complete a brief survey on Canvas.

# Auctions

The most common form of live auction in the US is the [English auction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/English_auction).  You may have seen the English auction procedure depicted in movies or on TV, where an auctioneer calls out prices in an increasing order and bidders indicate their interest in paying that price.  If a bidder can jump in and offer an amount higher than the current bid and that new amount becomes the current bid.  This process continues until no bidder is willing to increase the amount and the item is awarded to the highest bidder (at the price of their bid).

## Auction Simulation

We will simulate an auction in the following way:
1. Assume each person has 12 $5 bills that can be spent in the auction (i.e. $60).
2. Each person has a pre-conceived idea of the value of an item.  Like in the last example, TAs will discreetly tell each person how much value that person places on the item. 
3. You'll be given points based on the following:
  * 1 point for spending no more than you should, whether you win the item or not.
  * 2 points for winning the item *without overspending*.  (??? Check this. I re-worded the points)
  * 0 points if you overbid, whether you won the item or not.
4. TAs will conduct an auction for a single item for each group. The bidding will open at $5 and increase in $5 increments.  Students need to signal if they are willing to place a bid.

## English Auction: Automation

Consider how this process might be automated and perhaps put on-line.  What role would computer programs play?  How would bidders initially provide information to a computer, how would the bids be placed/updated, and how would the outcome be reported?  Take a few minutes and discuss this process. When done, provide a brief summary to your TA.

## Automated Auction

For this next part all students at a studio table will work together (you're no longer working in pairs).

1. The TA will play the role of a computerized auctioneer that will automatically increase bids on a bidders behalf.
2. The TA tells each student secretly how much that student is willing to bid for the item. (???)
3. Students will indicate their bids... (???)
4. The TA will discreetly show each student the current bid, and saying how much the computer would then bid on behalf of that student.

Once this is over, the student bidders talk about their bids and the results of the auction.

Did anything go wrong?

### Quick Survey

Each person should click [here]() to (individually) complete a brief survey on Canvas.
