---
title: Object Design
week: 7
assigned: 2018-07-26
due: 2018-07-26
---

* This will be a TOC
{:toc}

# Warmup
* First, form a group.
* All but one member of your group should have this web page open so you can follow along and see the instructions as you work
* Plan to have one computer at which your team does its work. Initially, one of you will be in charge of typing at that computer.
* Throughout the studio, you should trade who is in charge of the keyboard. Before doing so, **commit your work** to make sure your work is saved


# Guidelines

* This week\'s studio is an exercise in *design*, so get your
	right brains limbered up for some creative thinking.

* In design, there are no wrong or right answers.  However, some designs
	are better than others for certain purposes.  
	It will be important for each person in your
	group to be able to defend your team\'s design.
	
	* If some member does not understand an aspect of your team\'s design, the entire team may be docked studio credit.   It is not necessary that all decisions be made with unanimity, but the issues that influece the design one way or the other *must* be understood by all members of your team.

* A rush to implement something fully will be a Bad Idea. The group\'s goal this week is to arrive at a design, not an implementation.

* That said, we will be developing *stubs* in eclipse to
	represent the design, with a bit of *Javadoc* above each class
	and method to help generate documentation.

* As you design, thank about the **has-a** idea presented in class
	and articulate the **behaviors** you want your object to have.

* The design problems are presented to you in the form of a [user story](http://www.extremeprogramming.org/rules/userstories.html).

## Cautions

* Use rich data types where possible, both to document your design and to leverage Java\'s type system to avoid bugs in your program.
	For example, instead of representing a given account using an integer,
	an actual object `Account` was defined.  Similarly,
	an integer suffices to hold color information for a pixel, but
	a `Color` class (type) was defined to provide reliable
	functionality and to hide details of the implementation
	(encapsulation).
* Avoid passing parameters of generic type that represent something
	that could have been its own class.  For example, consider
	using `x` and `y` coordinates to represent
	a point, as shown below:

	`public void f(int x1, int y1, int x2, int y2) {...}`

	It is easy to forget the order in which the integers must be passed
	to `f`.  To avoid such chaos and to make the program more
	readable, articulate a `Point` object that has an x and y coordinate.  The method then becomes

	`public void f(Point p1, Point p2) {... }`

* Every class should have its `toString()` method defined,
	so that the class can return a `String` with some
	meaningful information about the class.  
	Generally, `toString()`
	methods should avoid invoking the `toString()` methods of any
	other class.

* Instance variables should be defined where necessary, but declared
	`private` to guard against accidental access or
	modification outside of the class holding the instance variables.

* Where necessary, each class should provide methods that get and set
	its local instance variables.  

	> Recall eclipse can generate those for you automatically.

	It is customary to base the name of such methods consistently on the name of the associated instance variable:


			public Person getPerson() {
			 return person;
			}

			public void setPerson(Person person) {
			 this.person = person;
			}



## Design Problems

* A number of stories appear below about various object types.

* Pick an object type, read the story, and design and implement
	a class in your `studio7` workspace for the object type.

* Include Javadoc comments in your code, and if possible, generate
     the Javadoc using eclipse.

	> From the `Project` menu choose `Generate Javadoc`.

* Write a simple test or two to test your implementation.

* Repeat this process with another object type until the end of class.

### Object Types

`Rectangle`

: A rectangle has a length and a width.   A rectangle should be able
	to provide its area and perimeter.  A rectangle can indicate whether it
	is smaller than another rectangle in terms of area.  A rectnagle can
	indicate whether it is in fact a square.

`Die`

: When a `Die` is constructed, it is specified to have
	**n** number of sides. Each time the die is thrown,
	a random integer is returned in the range 1..**n**, inclusively.

`Fraction`

: A fraction has a numerator and denominator.  A faction should be
	able to add itself to another fraction, returning a new fraction that
	represents the sum.  A fraction should be able to multiply itself
	by another fraction, returning a new fraction as the product.
	A fraction should be able to take the reciprocal of itself, returning
	that value as a new fraction.
	A fraction should be able to simplify itself, returning a new fraction
	as that simplification.

`Complex`

: A [complex number](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complex_number) has a real and imaginary part, each represented as a `double`.
	A complex should be able to add itself to another complex number, returning
	a new compmlex number as the sum (see below).  Similarly, a complex
	number should be able to  multiply
	itself by another complex number, returning a new complex number as
	the product.

* A complex number with real part a and imaginary part b is usually
	shown as `a + bi`.

* The result of adding two complex numbers <I>a</I> and <I>b</I> is another complex number whose
	real part is the sum of 
	the real parts of **a** and **b**

	and whose imaginary part is
	the sum of
	the imaginary parts of **a** and **b**.

* The product of (a+bi) and (c+di) is (ac-bd) + (ad+bc)i

`HockeyPlayer`

: A hockey player has a name and a jersey number.  Most players shoot either
	right or left, but some can shoot either way.  A player can be right- or
	left-handed, but shoot either right or left.   This object should be
	able to react when a player completes a game, recording how many goals
	and assists the player earned in that game.  A player has a certain
	number of goals and assists he or she has recorded over all games
	played.  Also, a player
	has a certain number of **points**, which is the sum of the goals
	and assists a player has earned.  A player has a certain number of games
	he or she has played. 
