---
title: Module 2
week: 2
---

# Exercise: Computing the max of two inputs

  * Find and open the **Max** Java program in the **exercises2** package.
  * Add code as directed there to prompt the user for integer values for
**x** and **y**.
  * Use conditional execution to print the larger of the two values.


# Exercise: A bad swap


  * Find and open the **BadSwap** Java program in the **exercises2** package.
  * Run the code if you like, providing various values for the inputs.
  * Fill in the comments to explain why the provided code does <EM>not</EM>
swap the values of **x** and **y**.

# Exercise: Heads or Tails?



  * Find and open the **CoinFlip** Java program in the **exercises2** package.
  * Complete the code so that it prints **heads** or **tails**
on each run of the program, with equal probability.


# Exercise: Inches to feet


  * Find and open the **FeetInches** Java program in the **exercises2** package.
  * Prompt the user for some number of inches.
  * Produce output that corresponds the number of feet and any leftover
       inches when converted from the specified input.
  * Be sure your output:

  * Uses the word **feet** for plural and **foot** for 
singular number of feet.
  * Uses the word **inches** for plural and **inch** for 
singular number of feet.

For example:

  * 13 inches will produce:  1 foot and 1 inch
  * 17 inches will produce:  1 foot and 5 inches
  * 28 inches will produce:  2 feet and 4 inches

# Exercise: Divide two numbers carefully


  * Find and open the **CarefulDivide** Java program in the **exercises2** package.
  * Prompt the user for an integer numerator and denomiantor
  * Compute the integer quoient of the inputs.
* However, if the denominator is 0, do not print the quotient.  Instead,
produce a suitable message about
the result being undefined.

# Exercise: A random die

  * Find and open the **Die** Java program in the **exercises2** package.
  * As directed in the comments, write code so that your program
prints an integer between 1 and 6, inclusively, with equal likelihood
of each possible result.

# Exercise: Average of random values


  * Find and open the **RandomAverages** Java program in the **exercises2** package.
  * As directed in the comments, write code so that your program
computes the average of 1, 2, 3, &hellip;, 1000 values.
  * Some questions are posed in comments.  Write your answers in comments
    below those questions.

# Exercise: Write some loop


  * Find and open the **Loops** Java program in the **exercises2** package.
  * Follow the comments to write loops that produce the specified outputs.
* If you get stuck, watch enough of the solution video to see how to accomplish
one task, and then try the next task on your own.

# Exercise: 100 runs of the 10 heads problem



  * Find and open the **Heads** Java program in the **exercises2** package.
  * Using a **for** loop, run the experiment already in the
**Heads** program 100 times.

# Exercise: N runs of the 10 heads problem


  * Continue modifying the **Heads** Java program in the **exercises2** package.
  * Instead of running the experiment 100 times, prompt the user for
a value **N** and run the experiment **N** times.

# Exercise: Average flips to get to 10 heads

  * Continue modifying the **Heads** Java program in the **exercises2** package.
  * With the experiment running **N** times, modify your program
so that, at the end, it prints the average number of coin flips required to
achieve 10 heads.


