---
title: Module 3
week: 3
---
			   
# Exercise: Make a copy of an array

There are two parts to this exercise:

* First you will make a copy of an array.  
* Then you will change your code so that as you copy, you create the 
[Pig Latin](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pig_Latin) version of 
each string from the original array.
* Find and open the **CopyArraysAndPigLatin** Java program in the **exercises3** package.
* Write code to make a copy of the provided **names** array.
We do this so that we can
make changes to the copy without affecting the original array.
If we call the copy array **copy**,  then the steps you take
are as follows:
	* Allocate the **copy** array with enough space to hold 
	each of the elements of **name**.

	>Do not use constants here:  pretend that the **names** array could
	>be of any length.
	* Iterate over the **names** array to assign each element of
	**copy** from **names**.
^
* Check your results by iterating over **copy** and printing
each element.
* Now go back and cause each element of the **copy** array to have
the
[Pig Latin](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pig_Latin) version of 
each string in the original **names** array.

# Exercise: Permuting an array


* Find and open the **Shuffle** Java program in the **exercises3** package.
* It declares an array of strings called **original** that 
contains the strings **A** through **H**, in alphabetical order.
* The goal of this exercise is to shuffle this array, or a copy of it
as you prefer, so at to obtain a randomized order of the strings.
* This is tricky, so try your best but don't feel bad if you need to
see the solution before you have it working completely.
^
> You can watch just enough of the solution video to get unstuck and then try
> moving forward on your own.

# Exercise: Multiplication Table


* Find and open the **TimesTable** Java program in the **exercises3** package.
* Complete the class so it prints a table of products, as shown
on the introductory video.
^
> Your columns should line up nicely, assuming that all products take at most
> 2 digits.  In other words, it should look nice when given an input value of 9.
> For greater values, your columns need not line up but the data should be
> correct.