---
title: Module 4
week: 4
---
			   
# Exercise: Statistics for a list of numbers

* Find and open the `Stats` Java program in the `exercises4` package
of the `exercises` source folder.

* You will need to create the `datafile` folder, the `average` folder, and files for  numbers used in the video.  To do so:
  * In IntelliJ, right click on the project folder and Select the `New` sub-menu and then `Directory`
    * Name the directory `datafiles` 
    * It should be at the same level of indentation as the `src` folder.  If it's not, you may have selected the wrong folder in pervious step.
  * Now Right-click on `datafiles`, select the `New` sub-menu, then select `Directory` again.
    * Name the directory `average`
  * Now Right-click on `average`, select the `New` sub-menu, then select `File`
      * Name the new file `values.txt` and hit `OK`, then select `Text` for the type of file.
      * Add a few numbers to the file, 1 per line, like:
		~~~
		2.0
		3.0
		-1.0
		~~~
	  * Be sure to save the `values.txt` file
 * Create a new file name `intvalues.txt` that will hold 500 random integers.  [Click here](https://www.random.org/integers/?num=500&min=-42&max=42&col=5&base=10&format=html&rnd=new){:target="_blank"} to use Random.orgs random number generator.  Copy/paste the integers into your file and save it (*only the integers, not the other text*).  Note: The min value in this set should be close to -42 and the max should be close to +42 (depending on the specific numbers you get).
 * Create another file that will hold 2000 random double values.  [Click here](https://www.random.org/gaussian-distributions/?num=2000&mean=3.141592653&stdev=5.0&dec=6&col=1&notation=scientific&format=html&rnd=new) to get 2000 values from Random.org's Gaussian Random Number Generator.  Note: The mean of this set should be somewhat close to Pi (~3.1).
* Write code to read in all the values and verify that it works.
* Compute statistics:
  * Compute the sum
  * Compute the average
  * Compute the count (i.e., how many numbers are in the file)
  * Find the minimum value 
  * Find the maximum value 


# Exercise: Example using graphics

* Find and open the `GraphicsDemo` Java program in the `exercises4` package
of the `exercises` source folder.

* For each of the following, write code to generate the graphics as
specified, and run your program after each addition to see that you are
creating the right kinds of shapes, colors, and sizes.

	* Draw a blue point anywhere you like
	* Draw a larger green point someplace else
	* Draw an unfilled red triangle somewhere
	* Draw a filled yellow circle somewhere
	* Draw a filled blue rectangle somewhere

> The book does not include mention of Sedgewick\'s [`filledRectangle`](https://introcs.cs.princeton.edu/java/stdlib/javadoc/StdDraw.html#filledRectangle-double-double-double-double-) method.  But it is there, and you can find it by pausing after typing the `.` (in `StdDraw.`).  IntelliJ will then show you possible completions, which will include `filledRectangle`.

# Exercise: Mouse and Keyboard

* Find and open the `WaitPoint` Java program in the `exercises4` package
of the `exercises` source folder.

* Write code that does the following:

	* Waits until the mouse has been pressed
	* Waits until the mouse has been released
	* Draws a visible point at the spot where the mouse was released
	* Waits until the user has typed a `q` (all other keys are ignored)
	* Writes text on the graphic screen that says goodbye

> Do this a step at a time, testing your code.  Look at the solution video intermittently as necessary.

# Exercise: Example of animation


* Find and open the `MouseFollower` Java program in the `exercises4` package
of the `exercises` source folder.

* That code already contains the standard animation loop:

	* `StdDraw.clear()` at the beginning, to wipe the graphics display clean
	* Your code will then paint one frame of the animation
	* `StdDraw.show(10)` produces what you have drawn on the screen and waits 10 milliseconds before continuing.   

	By using `show(..)`, the drawing you do is not actually shown between calls to `show`. Instead, the drawing is done in memory, off the screen, which is much faster.

	When you call `show()`, the work you have done off screen is put on screen all at once. 

	The program also pauses for the specified time, usually 10 to 50 milliseconds.  Pausing allows your computer to do something else for a while, which will make your computer feel more responsive in the other applications that are running.

* First try to get a ball on the screen to follow your mouse.  This
consists of reading the mouse\'s coordinates, and painting a ball at that
spot.

* When you have that working, try to think of how you could make the ball
appear to lag in its mouse-following activities.  

> As a hint, think about
> keeping some history of where the mouse has been. You can then have the
> ball go to locations in the mouse\'s past.

# Exercise: Frequency of a pitch

* Find and open the `Pitches` Java program in the `exercises4` package
of the `exercises` source folder.

* Insert code to prompt the user to enter an integer representing a pitch.

* Compute the frequency that corresponds to that pitch.

* Print the frequency of that pitch, the frequency of a pitch 7 chromatic
steps higher, and the ratio of the two frequencies.

# Exercise: Ratio of multiple pitches

* Continue modifying the `Pitches` Java program in the `exercises4` package
of the `exercises` source folder.

* Prompt the user to enter an integer for pitch 1.

* Prompt the user to enter an integer for pitch 2.

* Compute the frequency that corresponds to those pitches

* Print the frequency of both pitches and the ratio of the two frequencies.
