---
title: Module 6
week: 6
---



# Exercise: Recursive Factorial and Sum

* In the `exercises6` package of the `exercises` source folder, create

	* `Sum.java` as a Java class
	
	* `SumTest.java` as a JUnit test file

* Complete both so that sum is computed as defined by the explicitly recursive formula:

	* sum(n) = sum(n-1) + n, if n &gt; 0
	
	* sum(n) = 0, otherwise

* Write some tests for sum and run the unit test file to make sure
your function works.

Remember that you have to have a `@Test` directive above any
unit test method, as shown in the video.
			   

# Exercise: Recursive Addition

* In the `exercises6` package of the `exercises` source folder, complete the

	* `Add.java`
	
	* `addTest.java`

* Complete both so that addition is computed as defined by the explicitly recursive formula:

	* add(x,y) = x, if y = 0
	* add(x,y) = add(x+1,y-1), otherwise

* Write some more tests for add and run the unit test file to make sure your function works.

Remember that you have to have a `@Test` directive above any
unit test method, as shown in the video.

* Under what conditions on x and y does your method operate correctly?

* How could you complete the `addAll(x,y)` method so it works for any `x` and `y`?

See the code, as a hint is given there.

# Exercise: Recursion and Base Cases

## Part 1

In the video, one possible explanation for human reproduction was given,
namely that a woman is born with all of the babies already inside her that
she would ever deliver.  This idea is attributed to
<a href="http://10e.devbio.com/article.php?id=65"> Anton von Leeuwenhoek</a> 
who, as a lensmaker, greatly advanced the use of microscopes in studying biology.
In terms of recursion and base cases, what is wrong with
von Leeuwenhoek's speculation?

## Part 2

* In the `exercises6` package of the `exercises` source folder, find and open the `FactorialNoBaseCase` class.

* Run the class as a Java Application.

* What happens, and why?

# Exercise: Generating graph paper

* In the `exercises6` package of the `exercises` source folder, find and open the `GraphPaper` class.
  
* Complete the class so that it produces a grid on the screen

* Think about the recursive substructure of drawing a grid

* Think about the base case(s)
